                           Decompression Theory
             An Explanation of Professor A.A. Buehlmann's ZH-L16 Algorithm

                                                                                    by Paul Chapman

             The following is a summary of the
             decompression algorithm described
             by Dr A.A. Buehlmann in the fourth           Note to new divers and potential
             edition of his book Tauchmedizin (           new divers:
             diving medicine ) published in 1995 (
             only in German. ) The book contains          This information is presented for
             a considerable amount of other               general interest. Don't be scared off
             information and is published by              by what you see here - you don't
             Springer-Verlag ISBN 3-540-58970­            need to learn any of this to become a
             8. Rumor has it that at the time of          safe and competent scuba diver. You
             writing ( November 1999 ) an English         will however need to understand
             translation is being prepared for            dive planning.
             publishing, so hopefully, in due
             course, this document will become
             redundant.

             The algorithm is simply a "recipe" for modeling the behavior of inert gases, which
             diffuse in and out of our body tissues when breathed under varying pressures. The
             intention is that if the recipe models the actual processes in our bodies accurately
             enough, it can be used to plan dives ( and other pressure exposures ) with a view to
             avoiding decompression sickness.

             It is important to realize that the model is entirely arbitrary in the sense that it in no
             way represents the actual physical processes which are taking place, it simply attempt
             to model the real-life results mathematically. This article is intended mainly as a
                                               description of the algorithm, not as a complete
                                               description of decompression physiology and
                                               therefore mentions only physiology principles relevant
                                               to the algorithm.

                                             Background

                                            Scottish scientist John Scott Haldane ( 1860-1936 )
                                            is generally considered the founding father of modern
                                            decompression theory. In the last century ( 1896-1907
                                            ) Haldane experimented on goats in an attempt to find
                                            a solution to the problem of caisson disease,
                                            experienced by men working in pressurized bridge
                                            and tunnel construction areas. Research suggested that
             gases breathed under pressure by the workers were diffusing into the body's tissues,
             and that when these gases came out in the form of bubbles in the body, the workers
             got caisson disease, or what we now call decompression sickness, or the bends.




PDF created with pdfFactory Pro trial version www.pdffactory.com
             Haldane's work led him to consider the body as a group of tissues in parallel. This
             meant the tissues were all exposed simultaneously to the breathing gases at ambient
             pressure, but able to react to them in their own individual ways. No gas transfer from
             one tissue to another was considered. This principle is still in use and is the basis of
             many, but not all, current decompression models. The model used in the production
             of the British Sub Aqua Club BSAC-88 dive tables, for example, used a single block
             of tissue along which gas diffused, while the Canadian DCIEM model uses a range
             of tissues, but arranged in series - only the first of a range of tissues is exposed to the
             ambient pressure and gas diffusion takes place from one tissue to the next.

             Haldane also noticed that the body could tolerate a certain amount of excess gas with
             no apparent ill effects. Caisson workers pressurized at two atmospheres ( 33 feet )
             experienced no problems, no matter how long they worked. These two ideas, gas
             traveling though the body tissues and the theory of a tolerable overpressure formed
             the basis of Haldane's work. The tricky bit was to model exactly how the gas moved
             through the body and exactly what amount of overpressure was acceptable and
             Haldane actually achieved this with considerable success.

             Others developed Haldane's ideas over the years. In the mid-1960's US Navy Medical
             Corps Captain Robert Workman refined the idea of allowable overpressure in tissues,
             discounting oxygen and considering only inert gases in the breathing mix, such as
             nitrogen and helium. Workman's maximum allowable overpressure values ( what he
             called M-values ) were more complex than Haldane's, varying with depth and with
             tissue type.

             At around the same time Professor Albert Buehlmann was working on similar
             research at the University Hospital in Zurich. Buehlmann's research spanned over 30
             years and was published as a book, Dekompression - Dekompressionskrankheit in
             1983. This book, published in English in 1984, made fairly comprehensive
             instructions on how to calculate decompression available to a wide audience for the
             first time and therefore Buehlmann's work became the basis for many dive tables,
             computers and desktop decompression programs. Three other editions were
             published, the last in 1995, on which this document is based.

             Basic Ideas

             Due to differences in perfusion ( blood flow ) and diffusion ( rate of gas flow from
             one place to another ) and other factors, the inert gases we breathe are dissolved into
             our different body tissues at different speeds. Tissues with high rates of diffusion,
             which have a good blood supply, build up a gas load more quickly. The blood itself,
             major organs, and central nervous system fall under this heading and we call them
             fast tissues. Other tissues build up a gas load more slowly. Progressively slower
             tissues include muscle, skin, fat and bone.

             Many tissues, through good blood supply, are exposed almost immediately to higher
             inert gas pressures, while others have to wait for gas to reach them by diffusion from
             other surrounding tissues. In this sense the body tissues are both serial and parallel.
             Although a fast tissue will build up a higher inert gas load or on-gas more quickly
             when the pressure increases, it will also be able to get rid of that gas load more
             quickly than a slower tissue when the pressure drops, a process we call off-gassing. It




PDF created with pdfFactory Pro trial version www.pdffactory.com
                                                                         is assumed that tissues on-gas
                                                                         and off-gas according to the
                                                                         theory of half-times.

                                                                         Many natural phenomena are
                                                                         described this way, including
                                                                         radioactive decay. The idea is
                                                                         that when a tissue is exposed
                                                                         to a higher inert gas pressure,
                                                                         gas will flow into that tissue.
                                                                         After the half-time the
                                                                         pressure of gas in the tissue
                                                                         will be half way to equaling
                                                                         the pressure of the gas
                                                                         outside. After a second half­
             time, the gas pressure in the tissue will have risen by half of the remaining difference
             ( i.e. by a further quarter, ) making it 75%, or three-quarters, of the way to equaling
             the external gas pressure. After a third half-time, the rise is 12.5% ( 87.5% total ) and
             so on. By this method the pressure in the tissue never quite reaches the same level as
             the surrounding gas, but after 6 half-times ( equal to 98.4%, ) it is close enough and
             we say the tissue is saturated.

             At this point gas will diffuse into the tissue at the same rate that it diffuses out and the
             tissue experiences no further overall change in gas load. If the pressure then increases
             ( the diver goes deeper, ) the tissue will begin to on-gas again. If the pressure reduces,
             the tissue will off-gas, again following the half-time principle. After six half-times,
             the tissue will again be equilibrated with its surroundings. As well as differing for
             each tissue, half-times will vary for different gases, since they diffuse at different
             rates. For real human tissues the nitrogen half-times will vary from a few seconds (
             blood ) to many hours. For helium, half-times are thought to be about 2.65 times
             faster than nitrogen, since helium diffuses more quickly.

             If pressure is reduced by too much on a tissue, the gas will be unable to follow the
             diffusion route, via the bloodstream, back to the lungs and will form bubbles in the
             actual tissue, leading to many of the symptoms that we know as decompression
             sickness. So how much pressure reduction is too much? It has been shown by
             experimentation that faster tissues like blood can tolerate a greater drop in pressure
             than slower tissues, without bubble formation. One of the challenges to Buehlmann in
             formulating his algorithm was to quantify this difference in a mathematical formula
             that could be used to help calculate decompression profiles. We'll look at his solution
             in a moment.

             The Algorithm

             For his ZH-L16 algorithm Buehlmann chose to split the body into 16 tissues and
             give them a range of half-times, from several minutes to several hours. It is important
             to remember that these tissues do not represent any specific real tissues in the body
             and the half-times are simply chosen to give a representative spread of likely values.
             They do not represent actual tissues, or the actual half-times for any particular tissue.
             For this reason the often-used description of the 16 sections as tissues is confusing




PDF created with pdfFactory Pro trial version www.pdffactory.com
             and they will be referred to in future as compartments. Buehlmann named his
             algorithm from Zurich ( ZH ), limits ( L ) and the number of M-value sets ( 16 ).

             When exposed to pressure, each compartment on-gasses according to its given half
             time, so at any point we can calculate how much inert gas pressure exists in each
             compartment. There is a standard mathematical form for half-time calculation,
             Buehlmann made some additions to it to make a complete before/after formula for
             the inert gas pressure in any given compartment after any given exposure time. Here
             is the formula as published in Tauchmedizin, the names of the constants have been
             changed to make them more understandable in English, but the formula is the same:

                           Pcomp = Pbegin + [ Pgas - Pbegin ] x [ 1 - 2 ^ ( - te / tht ) ]

             where:

             Pbegin = Inert gas pressure in the compartment before the exposure time ( ATM )
             Pcomp = Inert gas pressure in the compartment after the exposure time ( ATM )
             Pgas = Inert gas pressure in the mixture being breathed ( ATM )
             te     = Length of the exposure time ( minutes )
             tht    = Half time of the compartment ( minutes )

                      and ^ stands for exponentiation

                      1 ATM = 14.7 psia ( 1 Atmosphere, or sea level standard pressure )




                Example:

                A diver descends from the surface to 100 feet on air and waits there
                ten minutes. The partial pressure of nitrogen in the breathing gas Pgas
                is 4 x 0.79 = 3.16 ATM. Let's pick a compartment, say number five.
                The nitrogen half-time for compartment five tht is 27 minutes. The
                nitrogen partial pressure in compartment five on the surface Pbegin is
                0.79 ATM, assuming the diver hasn't already been diving or subject to
                any altitude changes. The length of the exposure te is ten minutes.
                Plugging these values into the equation, we get:

                Pcomp = 0.79 + [ 3.16 - 0.79 ] x [ 1 - 2 ^ ( - 10 / 27 ) ]
                      = 1.33 ATM

                So the partial pressure of nitrogen in compartment five of our diver
                would be 1.33 ATM. In reality, the diver couldn't have made an
                instantaneous descent to 100 feet and would have been taking on gas
                during the descent as well. We could average the pressure during the
                descent and repeat the above calculation to get an idea of the extra gas,
                or simply repeat the calculation many times at short intervals during




PDF created with pdfFactory Pro trial version www.pdffactory.com
                 the descent. A computer makes this easy.

                 You can repeat this calculation, of course, for all the other
                 compartments, you just need to know the half-times, ( See Table 1 )
                 Again, a computer is the ideal tool for this job. The beauty of the
                 equation is its versatility. Absolute pressure ( not depth ) is used
                 everywhere, as is the actual partial pressure of the inert gas being
                 breathed, so we can ascend or descend to/from any pressure, breathe
                 any gas, change gases, go flying after diving, stay on the surface, do a
                 repetitive dive or anything we can think of.


             Now we know the inert gas pressure in any given compartment at any time, we need
             to know the depth ( or actually the pressure ) that we can ascend to safely. We
             already mentioned that this would vary for each compartment, with faster
             compartments tolerating a greater pressure drop than slower ones. Buehlmann
             decided that the amount of pressure drop that a certain compartment could tolerate
             without bubble formation could be mathematically linked to its half-time. He first
             derived two factors, which he called "a" and "b" from the half-time ( so each
             compartment has its own pair of a and b values ), then he used these factors to
             calculate the pressure that we could ascend to. The a and b modifiers are obtained
             from the following formulas:

             a    = 2 x ( tht ^ -1/3 )

             b    = 1.005 - ( tht ^ -1/2 )

             where tht is the half-time for the compartment.


                 For example, the half-time for compartment 5 is 27 minutes, so

                 a = 2 x ( 27 ^ -1/3 )
                   = 0.6667

                 b = 1.005 - ( 27^ -1/2 )
                   = 0.8125


             Remember that the half-times vary for different gases, so each gas will have its own
             set of half-times, a and b values. ( see Table 1 )

             Now that we know a and b, we can use a formula to calculate the pressure that we
             can ascend to for each compartment. Here is the formula Buehlmann chose to use:

                                             Pambtol = ( Pcomp - a ) x b

             where:




PDF created with pdfFactory Pro trial version www.pdffactory.com
             Pcomp = the inert gas pressure in the compartment ( ATM )
             Pambtol = is the pressure you could drop to ( ATM )

             and a and b are the a and b values for that compartment and the gas in question ( See
             Table 1 )


                Continuing the example above, we found that a exposure for ten
                minutes to 4 ATM pressure ( 100 feet depth ), led to a nitrogen
                pressure of 1.33 ATM in compartment 5. The a and b values for
                compartment 5 were 0.6667 and 0.8125 respectively. Plugging these
                into the above gives:

                Pambtol = ( 1.33 - 0.6667 ) x 0.8125
                        = 0.54 ATM


             Pressure at sea level is taken to be 1 ATM and the above equation shows us that we
             can actually ascend to a pressure lower than that ( i.e. above the surface. ) In other
             words, according to the model, after 10 minutes at 100 feet ( 4 ATM ) we could
             ascend straight to the surface with no bubble formation in compartment 5 assuming
             we were breathing air. This is a "no-stop" dive, as we'd expect from looking at our
             dive tables !

             If we tried our 100 foot exposure for 50 minutes, we would find the nitrogen partial
             pressure in compartment five was 2.5 ATM ( from the first equation ) and our
             pressure could drop to 1.49 ATM. This pressure is just under 16 feet depth, so this is
             the maximum depth that compartment 5 would allow us to ascend to after 50 minutes
             at 100 feet.


                Using the same depth and 50 minutes, if we repeat this method for all
                the other compartments, we'll find different values, for example:

                Compartment 3: Half-time = 12.5 minutes

                a       = 0.8618
                b       = 0.7222
                Pcomp = 3.01 ATM
                Pambtol = ( 3.01 - 0.8618 ) x 0.7222
                        = 1.55 ATM ( or approximately 20 feet depth )

                Compartment 10: Half-time = 146 minutes

                a          = 0.3798
                b          = 0.9222
                Pcomp      = 1.29 ATM




PDF created with pdfFactory Pro trial version www.pdffactory.com
                Pambtol = ( 1.29 - 0.3798 ) x 0.9222
                        = 0.84 ATM ( still above the surface )


             Once we've repeated this for each compartment, we cannot ascend any shallower than
             the deepest of the tolerated depths. In our three-compartment example, this is 20 feet.
             This is called our decompression ceiling and the compartment concerned (
             compartment 3 ) is said to "control" the decompression at this point. In general, faster
             compartments will control short, shallow dives. Long shallow dives and short, deep
             dives will see a shift towards the middle compartments as controllers while long,
             deep dives will be controlled by the slower compartments.

             The controlling compartment will often shift during a decompression. For example, a
             short deep exposure may see the initial ceiling limited by the faster compartments,
             but as these off-gas quickly the control shifts to the slower, mid-range,
             compartments. As you can imagine, calculating the gas loads for a sequence of
             several dives of differing depths and durations is quite involved. Although the math is
             actually straightforward, as we've seen, the number of calculations and constant
             shifting of the controlling compartment and its associated decompression ceiling
             make it a great job for a computer.

             If we were actually planning a decompression for our 100 foot, 50 minute dive, we
             could ascend right up to the 20 foot ceiling, but it is more usual to choose a
             convenient interval for decompression stops, say every 10 feet, then you'd ascend to
             the nearest multiple of 10 feet that is below the decompression ceiling. In this
             example that is 20 feet. At this point the inert gas pressure in the more highly loaded
             compartments will be above the inert gas pressure in the breathing mix and those
             compartments will start to off-gas. Other compartments may have inert gas pressures
             lower than the breathing gas and these compartments will still be on-gassing.

             We start the half-time calculations again. The formula is identical taking reductions
             in pressure ( ascents ) into account automatically. During the ascent the inert gas
             partial pressure being breathed Pgas drops, whereas the pressure in the compartment
             Pbegin hasn't caught up yet, so the [ Pgas - Pbegin ] part of the equation becomes
             negative. Don't forget the driving force for the gas diffusion ( in this model, at least )
             is the difference between the inert gas pressure in the compartment and the ambient
             partial pressure of the inert gas.

             At 20 feet the PPN2 ( partial pressure of Nitrogen ) in air is 1.26 ATM. In our
             example, the nitrogen pressure in compartments 3 and 5 was 3.01 ATM and 1.33
             ATM respectively. These are both higher than the 1.26 ATM ambient PPN2, so
             compartments 3 and 5 will off-gas at this decompression stop. The PPN2 in
             compartment 10 however has only reached 0.29 ATM. This compartment will
             continue to on-gas at 20 feet depth, although at a slower rate than before because the
             ambient PPN2 is lower than at 100 feet.

             The ceiling will gradually get shallower as the compartments off-gas, eventually
             reaching our chosen next stop depth of 10 feet. At this point we ascend to this depth




PDF created with pdfFactory Pro trial version www.pdffactory.com
             and start the process again, until we reach a point where the ambient pressure
             Pambtol for all compartments is less than, or equal to, one and we can reach the
             surface.

             That's all there is to it. Calculations can continue while you're on the surface (
             compartments continue to off-gas ), so we can allow for a surface interval between
             dives and when we go down for our next dive some compartments may still be
             partially loaded. This loading will automatically be added to any additional gas
             gained during the dive, adjusting the decompression accordingly.

             Flying or ascending to altitude is just a matter of ascending through the atmosphere.
             The calculations are the same, it is just that the pressure changes may take thousands
             of feet of air as opposed to just a few feet of water. If we know the cabin pressure in
             an airliner ( say 8000 feet ) we can use this as our ceiling and carry on calculating
             until we can reach it ... this is our "time to fly".

             The formulas use inert gas partial pressure throughout, so diving with Nitrox is
             automatically accommodated. Likewise Trimix ( oxygen, nitrogen and helium mixes
             ) and alternative decompression gases ( usually with lower proportions of inert gas )
             can all be accommodated within the same basic algorithm as long as we know the
             half times and the a and b values for the gases. Where multiple inert gases are used,
             an intermediate set of a and b values are calculated based on the gas proportions.



             Table 1

                           ZH-L16A Half-times, "a" and "b" values for Nitrogen and Helium

              Compartment                     Nitrogen                         Helium


                                    Half-time a Value b Value Half-time a Value b Value
                       1              4.0     1.2599 0.5050     1.5     1.7435 0.1911
                       2               8.0      1.0000    0.6514       3.0       1.3838     0.4295
                       3              12.5      0.8618    0.7222       4.7       1.1925     0.5446
                       4              18.5      0.7562    0.7725       7.0       1.0465     0.6265
                       5              27.0      0.6667    0.8125      10.2       0.9226     0.6917
                       6              38.3      0.5933    0.8434      14.5       0.8211     0.7420
                       7              54.3      0.5282    0.8693      20.5       0.7309     0.7841
                       8              77.0      0.4701    0.8910      29.1       0.6506     0.8195
                       9              109.0     0.4187    0.9092      41.1       0.5794     0.8491
                       10             146.0     0.3798    0.9222      55.1       0.5256     0.8703
                       11             187.0     0.3497    0.9319      70.6       0.4840     0.8860
                       12             239.0     0.3223    0.9403      90.2       0.4460     0.8997
                       13             305.0     0.2971    0.9477      115.1      0.4112     0.9118




PDF created with pdfFactory Pro trial version www.pdffactory.com
                     14            390.0      0.2737     0.9544       147.2      0.3788     0.9226
                     15            498.0      0.2523     0.9602       187.9      0.3492     0.9321
                     16            635.0      0.2327     0.9653       239.6      0.3220     0.9404



             Modifications for the Real World

             Take note that all the above is to be read in the context of referring to the ZH-L16
             model, not to our own bodies. Buehlmann carried out a considerable amount of actual
             testing to validate the ZH-L16 algorithm, but only using nitrogen as the inert gas.
             The half times for helium were derived from those for nitrogen, based on the
             speculative idea that the relative diffusivity of the gases was all that mattered. Since
             the a and b values are further derived from the half times, these also fall under the
             heading of educated guesswork.

             Sadly, Buehlmann died before he was able to put his theoretical figures for helium to
             any extensive tests. It appears that Buehlmann's values for helium may be rather too
             conservative, and for years the result has been that people have assumed that
             decompressions from helium would be longer than from nitrogen, simply because
             that was what the formula told us. In fact helium is generally a much more "deco­
             friendly" gas than nitrogen, being less soluble in our tissues. The rapidly diffusing
             gas is more prone to bubble formation, requiring control of ascent rates and
             decompression stops that start deeper than nitrogen. The payback is shorter shallow
             stops and a reduced overall time for decompression.

             A huge number of factors affect inert gas absorption, elimination and our
             susceptibility to decompression sickness. Some of these factors we know, some we
             guess at and some, no doubt, remain to be discovered. Among the first two categories
             are:

                •   Repetitive, yo-yo, reverse and bounce dive profiles
                •   Rapid ascents
                •   Missed decompression stops
                •   Heavy workloads
                •   Exercise, or lack of, during decompression
                •   Cold
                •   Flying after diving
                •   Poor physical conditioning
                •   Inter-pulmonary shunts
                •   Drug use (including alcohol)
                •   Dehydration
                •   Age

             In an attempt to address some of these factors, Buehlmann suggested and made
             several modifications to his algorithms. For dive table production, the "a" values
             were altered to be a little more conservative, principally in the middle compartments,
             resulting in a variation of the algorithm called ZH-L16B. Further variations to both
             middle and upper "a" values are used in ZH-L16C, intended for use in dive




PDF created with pdfFactory Pro trial version www.pdffactory.com
             computers, where the exact depth and time tracking removed some of the natural
             conservatism associated with table use. Attempts to include the effects of some of the
             other predisposing factors mentioned above led to the ZH-L8 ADT "adaptive"
             algorithm, implemented on the latest Aladdin dive computers.

             Dive computers and planning programs for personal computers, typically implement
             these modifications and/or variations of their own in an attempt to make the dive
             profiles they generate more realistic, or more usually, just "more conservative".
             Modifications include:

                •   planning dives deep and/or longer than actual
                •   further tweaking of the a and b values
                •   limiting compartment over-pressure Pambtol to a percentage of the
                    calculated value
                •   changing the amount of inert gases by some factor
                •   using longer half-times for the off-gassing phase of the profile
                •   adding more compartments
                •   and any number of other factors and combinations of factors.

             It is interesting to note that the model clearly tells us that there is no such thing as a
             "no-decompression" dive. We begin to on-gas immediately we descend. What we call
             a no-decompression dive is really one where the ceiling is still above the surface. As
             the dive goes on and the ceiling reaches the surface, we can factor in the ascent rate
             and gain a few more minutes "no-decompression time".

             Modern Ideas

             The reality is that we will never get truly accurate decompression tables or
             computers. The chaotic nature of our own physiology means a certain amount of
             conservatism will be required. The best we can generally hope for are ones that work
             most of the time, for most people. It is highly likely that current tables are much too
             conservative for some individuals, while being overly liberal for others. As our
             knowledge of decompression physiology improves, this holds out the hope of tables,
             or more likely computer programs, tailored to some extent for the individual.
             Organizations such as the Woodville Karst Plain Project, with a large database of
             extreme dive exposures, and knowledgeable and committed team members, have
             achieved great advances in this area.

             From Doppler studies, we now know that bubbles form in divers after most dives.
             Although causing no noticeable symptoms, gas elimination from these so-called
             silent bubbles occurs differently from gas dissolved in the blood. A reduction in
             ambient pressure will cause these bubbles to grow regardless of inert gas diffusion.
             Buehlmann's algorithm assumes all gas is being eliminated in the dissolved phase (
             i.e. dissolved in the tissues ) and does not take these factors into account. Bubble
             mechanics formulae such as Bruce Weinke's Reduced Gradient Bubble Model
             attempt to model gas elimination in the gas-phase ( bubbles ) as well as dissolved gas.

             Finally, helium is becoming accepted as a more deco-friendly gas than nitrogen. As
             well as the benefits of narcosis reduction, further experimentation holds out the
             possibility of faster decompressions than were previously thought possible and will




PDF created with pdfFactory Pro trial version www.pdffactory.com
             probably include the use of helium in decompression gases as well as bottom mixes.
             Helium is expensive, which has limited its use in sport diving, however rebreathers
             may eventually become reliable and simple enough for the average scuba diver to
             take advantage of helium mixtures economically and safely.

             Further Reading

             The Encyclopedia of Recreational Diving
             PADI - ISBN 1-878663-02-X

             As an introduction to recreational diving, it's hard to beat PADI's encyclopedia.
             Chemistry, physics, physiology, equipment and the aquatic environment are
             explained simply and clearly. Offers a great deal more than the information contained
             in an open water diving course without getting too technical in its language. Recently
             reprinted with more up-to-date information.

             Diving Physiology in Plain English
             Jolie Bookspan - Published by UHMS Inc - ISBN 0-930406-13-3

             The natural next-step from the "The Encyclopedia of Recreational Diving" (above),
             Dr Bookspan takes us to the next level and explodes a few commonly held
             misconceptions along the way. Some medical terms are used, but they're explained as
             we go along and topics such as decompression tables, immersion effects, gender
             issues, diving injuries, exercise and nutrition are introduced in a chatty and easy to
             read manner.

             Pocket Medical Dictionary
             Edited by Nancy Roper - Published by Churchill Livingstone - ISBN 0-443-03180-0

             Several of the following books are written with the assumption that the reader is au
             fait with medical terminology. In fact this is not such a handicap for the lay reader as
             you may assume. For the most part the terminology is a combination of prefixes, such
             as "hypo" ( say "high po" = under or below ), a root word, such as "glyc" ( say
             "glike" = sugar ) and suffixes, such as "ia" ( say "eee aah" = a condition or process ).
             Thus the medical term "hypoglycemia", becomes the simple "too little (blood)
             sugar"...easy! As you can imagine, a grasp of the meaning of a few prefixes, roots
             and suffixes can have you sounding like an extra from ER in no time. The Pocket
             Medical Dictionary, published in association with the Royal Society of Medicine,
             fills in the blanks in double-quick time, while "Physiology & Anatomy" (below) adds
             flesh to the bones.

             Physiology & Anatomy
             John Clancy & Andrew J. McVicar - Published by Edward Arnold - ISBN 0-340­
             63190-2

             This is an incredibly interesting book for the non-medical reader. Sub-titled "a
             homeostatic approach" it not only explains how the systems of the body work, but
             how they inter-react to maintain the balance ("homeostasis") that we need to sustain
             life and what happens when that balance is upset. Illustrated in color throughout, it's a
             must.




PDF created with pdfFactory Pro trial version www.pdffactory.com
             Resuscitation Handbook
             Peter J.F. Baskett - Published by Times Mirror International Publishers Ltd - ISBN 1­
             56375-620-X

             Advanced life support techniques for those already familiar and well practiced in
             basic life support. The theory presented is valuable but the practical skills can only be
             developed in conjunction with a properly run advanced life support course.

             The Physiology and Medicine of Diving
             Peter Bennett & David Elliott - Published by W B Saunders - ISBN 0-7020-1589-X

             Generally known as "Bennett & Elliott" this is the diving medical bible. In fact both
             Bennett and Elliott are prolific contributors to many other publications, including
             "Bove & Davis" (below), but this is probably the most comprehensive text on the
             subject available. It's uncompromisingly directed at the medically-educated reader,
             but don't let that put you off. Get your copies of the "Pocket Medical Dictionary" and
             "Physiology & Anatomy" alongside, with a pencil to make notes in the margin and
             you'll surprise yourself in no time.

             Bove and Davis' Diving Medicine
             Edited by Alfred A Bove - Published by W B Saunders - ISBN 0-7216-6056-8

             Slimmer and less well known than the previous and following texts ( around 400
             pages as opposed to 600 and 550 respectively ), Bove & Davis nevertheless fields
             heavyweight contributions from many of the professions big guns. In common with
             Bennett & Elliott, B&D's chapters conclude with an extensive reference section
             which could provide a lifetime's research in their own right. If you don't have a
             medical degree, keep a copy of the "Pocket Medical Dictionary" to hand.

             Diving and Subaquatic Medicine
             Edmonds, Lowry & Pennefather - Published by Butterworth Heinmann - ISBN - 0­
             7506-2131-1

             A personal favorite, "ELP" offers in-depth information with a slightly less clinical
             approach. Some less-commonly published data is included ( have you had "scuba
             diver's thigh"? ) and each chapter concludes with a useful "recommended reading"
             section.

             Tauchmedizin
             A.A. Buehlmann - Published by Springer-Verlag - ISBN 3-540-58970-4

             "Tauchen" is the German verb "to Dive" and you can guess the rest of the title.

             My thanks to the members of the Woodville Karst Plain Project for providing both
             valuable information and the inspiration to learn more and do it right. If you have any
             comments on this document, the author would be pleased to hear from you. Paul
             Chapman may be contacted at paul@delsys.demon.co.uk or at Professional Diver
             Training on 0151 343 1601.




PDF created with pdfFactory Pro trial version www.pdffactory.com
                This excellent article has been reformatted for the web from the
                original document by Paul Chapman, and "Americanised" with units,
                spellings, and grammar, but is otherwise unchanged. I could not have
                written a better description of this subject.

                The inverse-exponential basis of Buehlmann's algorithm is the natural
                mathematical model for gas diffusion. Decompression involves many
                factors that are too complex and uncertain to model. Rather than using
                calculations of ever-increasing complexity and doubtful accuracy and
                realism, Buehlmann runs 16 simple simulations in parallel, and selects
                the worst case. This is a very broad-based approach to modeling
                something that is inherently unpredictable.

                Occam's Razor is a logical principle attributed to the medieval
                philosopher William of Occam (or Ockham). The principle states that
                one should not make more assumptions than the minimum needed. In
                other words, the simplest solution to a problem is usually the right
                one.

                                                                      -- Editor, NJSD


                •   Introductory "Lessons" About Dissolved Gas Decompression Modeling - Erik
                    Baker
                •   Calculating the No-Stop Time by Erik Baker
                •   Understanding M-values by Erik Baker
                •   Clearing Up The Confusion About "Deep Stops" by Erik Baker
                •   Oxygen Toxicity Calculations by Erik Baker

                •   DIY Decompression by Stuart Morrison
                •   The Variable Permeability Model by Dan Reinders & Richard Pyle
                •   Abyss / Reduced Gradient Bubble Model by Bruce Weinke

             more


                           Decompression Theory 2


             You can make neat colorful graphs of nitrogen loading curves, so here we go ...




PDF created with pdfFactory Pro trial version www.pdffactory.com
                    Theoretical nitrogen pressure curves for 16 Buehlmann compartments.

                •   At time = 0, ambient pressure is instantaneously increased from 1 ATA to 5
                    ATA.
                    ( or 130ft, PN2 = 3.95 ATA )

                •   At time = 60, ambient pressure is instantaneously reduced back to 1 ATA
                    (surface)

                •   This is obviously not possible in real life, but is suitable for purposes of
                    exposition.
                    If this was a real dive profile, it would kill you in more ways than one !

             From the gas loading curves, it is apparent that the four "fastest" compartments ( 4.0 ­
             18.5, thin lines ) become largely or completely saturated, and that they also unload
             very quickly, such that after one hour of off-gassing, they are all back within the
             "safe" pressure ratio of 1.6:1 ( equal to 1.26:0.79 at the surface. )




PDF created with pdfFactory Pro trial version www.pdffactory.com
             The five slowest compartments ( 239.0 - 635.0, stippled lines ) pick up so little
             nitrogen loading that even at t=60 they have not achieved a pressure ratio of 1.6:1
             with respect to surface pressure. They would therefore seem to present little concern
             for decompression in this example.

             However, the seven middle compartments ( 27.0 - 187.0, heavy lines ) all become
             significantly nitrogen-loaded, and off-gas slowly enough that even at the end-time of
             this plot ( t=120 ) they all still contain more than the "safe" pressure ratio of 1.6:1. In
             Buehlmann's model of decompression, it is typically these compartments that control
             decompression schedules for real-world dive profiles.

             Typically, in real decompression schedules, the fast compartments off-gas well
             within the times required for the middle compartments, while the slow compartments
             seldom enter into the equation. Perhaps less intuitive is the fact that the heavily­
             loaded fast compartments may still influence the early part of an extended
             decompression schedule ( "deep stops" ) before yielding control to the middle
             compartments. Slow compartments may affect "time to fly" considerations.

             It is also worth noting that off-gassing is a much slower process than on-gassing, as
             evidenced by the fact that after an equal time of on-gassing and off-gassing, only the
             two fastest compartments have returned to their original state; all others still contain
             significant nitrogen loads.

             One might also conclude from this presentation that short "bounce dives" of around 5
             minutes duration should be relatively safe, since only the fast compartments acquire
             any significant nitrogen loading, and this can be off-loaded with a brief deco stop or
             even just a slow ascent. Alas, that is not the case though, as real-life is a lot more
             complicated than this simple plot.




PDF created with pdfFactory Pro trial version www.pdffactory.com
             What would the nitrogen pressure curves look like for a more realistic dive profile?
             Above is a profile taken directly from the PADI Recreational Dive Planner: 100 ft for
             19 minutes, with a 5 minute safety stop at 15 ft. Ascents and descents are crudely
             modeled in 1 ATA steps. It becomes clear from this plot that for relatively short, no­
             decompression dives, the very long compartments of Buehlmann's model are
             essentially irrelevant - they never reach a high enough pressure to matter. PADI came
             to this conclusion as well: their model is based on 7 tissue compartments with half­
             times from 5 to 120 minutes.

             Another point here concerns surface intervals. After 30 minutes, or t=60, several
             compartments still show significant nitrogen loading. After about 60 minutes, or
             t=90, all have dropped down to fairly low levels, with little improvement at 90
             minutes ( t=120 ). This would suggest that a surface interval of around 60 minutes is
             optimal; shorter is not enough, and much longer is simply a waste of time.




PDF created with pdfFactory Pro trial version www.pdffactory.com
               The same profile calculated with the seven tissue compartments of PADI's RDP.

             A quick calculation of pressure ratios will demonstrate that according to this graph,
             the diver will leave the water with a worst-case pressure ratio of about 2.0, or
             probably bent. That just goes to show that decompression modeling is much more
             complex than what is depicted in these crude graphs. The PADI RDP has a proven
             track record of safety. PADI, the US Navy, and others went through reams of real-life
             data, tweaking, adjusting, testing, and retesting their models. They didn't just crank
             out a few simplified equations and call it a day, like I have here.

             Most dive computers that utilize Haldane's method use nine to twelve tissue
             compartments, rather than the full 16 of Buehlmann's model. There are a number of
             other decompression models besides Haldane's. Some are quite complex and curious.
             Bubble models concentrate on the physical formation and growth of gas bubbles,
             while the latest Navy method takes a purely statistics-based approach, and makes no
             attempt to model any physical process at all. In the end though, they all share one
             thing: they all tweaked to fit real-world data on scuba diving. Is one model better than
             another? Given that they all "cheat" in the end to get the right answer, I would say




PDF created with pdfFactory Pro trial version www.pdffactory.com
             probably not.




                     Decompression Theory 3
             There is nothing mystical about
             decompression theory. In fact, it is all
             rather straightforward. For example,        Note to new divers and potential
             here is the Buehlmann ZH-L16A               new divers:
             decompression algorithm ( er, I mean
             the Modified Haldane algorithm; see         This information is presented for
             below ) as described previously,            general interest. Don't be scared off
             implemented in Microsoft Excel. In          by what you see here - you don't
             addition, versions B and C of the           need to learn any of this to become a
             algorithm are also presented. If you        safe and competent scuba diver. You
             have not already done so, you should        will however need to understand
             read this excellent explanation of          dive planning.
             Haldane's decompression algorithm
             before proceeding.




                  Warning:

                  This software should not be used for the planning of actual dives !
                  This implementation of the modified Haldanean decompression
                  algorithm is extremely rudimentary and is suitable for educational
                  purposes only.

                  This software has received no scientific testing or validation. This
                  software may contain bugs, and the figures which it outputs may be
                  erroneous. The schedules which it generates are simply the results
                  of mathematical calculations which do not in any way represent the
                  mechanics of the human body. Do not use this software in
                  situations where failure of the software may lead to illness, injury
                  or death. The designers of this software accept no responsibility for
                  illness, injury, loss or death of the user or any third party.




PDF created with pdfFactory Pro trial version www.pdffactory.com
                                    Click image to download spreadsheet.



             User-enterable dive waypoints and conservatism factors make up the green cells in
             the sheet. Each waypoint triplet represents a segment of a dive:

                •   depth ( feet, bold red indicates decompression violation )
                •   time at depth ( minutes )
                •   fraction of Nitrogen in the breathing gas ( 0.79 = air )

             Fill in your dive profile starting with waypoint 1 and using as many as you need.
             Unused waypoints can be cleared. All dives are assumed to begin at sea level and
             breathing air ( FN2 = 0.79 ) and are assumed to be conducted in saltwater.

             Cells A2 and A3 are user-enterable scale factors for the a and b values. Entering
             values less than 1.00 here will cause the allowable pressure calculations to back off
             from the theoretical limits, making the algorithm more conservative. The default
             values are 1.00 - least conservative. Cell A9 is the maximum deep-stop pressure ratio.
             Cell A10 is a dummy - you can use it for a dive sequence number if you like.

             The blue cells show the cumulative results of the previous and current waypoints:




PDF created with pdfFactory Pro trial version www.pdffactory.com
                •   PN2 and PO2 are the partial pressures of oxygen and nitrogen at the current
                    depth and gas mix. This is not strictly part of the algorithm, but is presented to
                    assist in selection of Nitrox mixes.

                •   Ceiling is the decompression ceiling at the end of the current waypoint,
                    or the minimum depth that can be ascended to at the next waypoint. Negative
                    ceilings are above sea level (see below.)

                •   Max P ratio is the worst-case compartment pressure ratio that would result
                    from ascending to the ceiling depth.

                •   Deep Ceiling is the deep-stop decompression ceiling at the end of the current
                    waypoint, based on the limiting pressure ratio selected in cell A9.

                •   Offgassing is the minimum depth at which at least one tissue compartment is
                    offgassing, even if others may still be on-gassing.

             Below each waypoint is the column of calculations for the theoretical tissue
             compartments. For each compartment, the partial pressure of nitrogen is shown
             above, and the minimum tolerable ambient pressure is shown below. Results
             displayed in red indicate that decompression will be required at the next waypoint.
             The maximum values for each column are bolded, while the controlling compartment
             for each waypoint is picked out with reverse colors.

             The formatting of the intermediate calculations allows the internal workings of the
             algorithm to be easily inspected. Changes in compartment pressures at each waypoint
             are displayed, and the shifting of the controlling compartment is visually obvious,
             especially when long duration dives or surface intervals are broken up into short
             equal-depth waypoints.

             Pulmonary Oxygen Toxicity units ( OTU, at the bottom of the sheet ) is not part of
             the decompression algorithm, but is a simple calculation that is easy to implement in
             the spreadsheet, and so is included here as an afterthought. BSAC recommends
             limiting oxygen exposure to 800 OTU / day. CNS oxygen toxicity is not calculated.


                Example:

                The spreadsheet is already "seeded" with some interesting waypoint
                data. The waypoints are as follows:

                 Waypoints 1-5:     An outlandish decompression dive to 130 feet for
                                    50 minutes on air. This is broken up into five
                                    segments to show the on-gassing of the 16
                                    compartments over time.
                 Waypoints 6-8:     Voluntary deep stops at 60 and 50 feet on air for
                                    two minutes each. Note that by the regular deco
                                    algorithm, an ascent directly to 40 feet is allowed,




PDF created with pdfFactory Pro trial version www.pdffactory.com
                                    but this would incur a very high worst-case
                                    compartment pressure ratio, and should therefore
                                    be avoided.
                 Waypoint 8:        Obligatory decompression stop at 40 feet for two
                                    minutes on air.
                 Waypoints 9-11: Obligatory decompression stops at 30, 20, & 10
                                 feet for a total of 29 minutes, on 80% O2 Nitrox
                                 decompression mix. Note that these stops are
                                 following the "normal" decompression ceiling
                                 rather than the deep stop ceiling.
                 Waypoint 12:       Surface interval of 2 hours
                 Waypoint 13:       A no-decompression dive to 90 feet for 40
                                    minutes on EAN36 or 36% Nitrox
                 Waypoint 14:       Five minute safety stop at 15 feet on EAN36
                 Waypoint 15:       24 hour time-to-fly interval
                 Waypoint 16:       2-1/2 hour airplane flight at a cabin pressure of
                                    8000 feet ( typical airliner )

                Following the usual practice, the obligatory deco stops ( waypoints 8­
                11 ) are rounded up to the next ten foot depth. Therefore, a
                decompression ceiling of 30 feet at waypoint 7 results in a
                decompression stop of 40 feet. for waypoint 8. The time at waypoint 8
                is then adjusted to result in the deepest possible ceiling above 30 feet,
                the next intended deco stop. This process is continued until the ceiling
                becomes 0 or negative, at which point it is safe to ascend to the
                surface. One could also follow the deep-stop schedule all the way to
                the surface, but that would take much longer.

                You may notice that the 50 foot stop slightly violates the deep stop
                requirements, and really should be three minutes instead of two.
                However, making all the deep stops the same is a nice simplification
                for the real dive. You could just as well make all the deep stops three
                minutes for added conservatism, or 2-3-2 if you are really fussy, but in
                my opinion that would be placing a great deal of weight on the
                precision and accuracy of a model that is inherently rough at best.
                Perhaps the real point of all this is to show that good common sense
                and understanding are more important than blind reliance on any
                mathematical model, whether it is this one or the one in your dive
                computer !


             Deep Stops
             Recall that Haldane originally postulated that a "compartment" could undergo a




PDF created with pdfFactory Pro trial version www.pdffactory.com
                                              later revised down to 1.6. Therefore the limiting
                                              pressure ratio of 1.5 (cell A9) for the deep-ceiling
                                              calculations is somewhat conservative. Note that
                                              many of the maximum pressure ratio values are
                                              considerably greater than this: a fast ascent to the
                                              theoretical ceiling depth of two feet at waypoint
                                              three would result in a worst-case compartment
                                              pressure ratio of 3.2 - approximately the same as a
                                              can of soda ( that's pop, for you midwesterners. )
                                              and would very likely result in arterial bubbling
             and bends, even though it is completely within the accepted decompression model !

             The purely mathematical ZH-L16A algorithm was found to be inadequate for real­
             world use, and so was developed into the more conservative ZH-L16B and ZH-L16C
             algorithms, which are also presented. ZH-L16B was developed for dive table
             calculations by empirically tweaking some of the a-values. ZH-L16C was developed
             in the same way for use in real-time dive computers, and is more conservative again.

             As you can see, the spreadsheet does pretty much everything your dive computer can
             do, and then some. Nitrox is automatically handled, as are repetitive dives, gas
             switches, user-selectable conservatism, and high altitude diving. However, rather
             than giving you a complete decompression schedule for your dive, the spreadsheet
             merely indicates the ceiling for the next waypoint, based on the allowable
             overpressure of the current waypoint. This can be used to work out a staged
             decompression schedule by hand, as I have done in the example. Similarly, the user
             may incorporate waypoints for deep stops, air breaks, surface intervals, and even
             time-to-fly.

             Ascents and descents are assumed to be instantaneous - not very realistic. These
             could instead be modeled using very short waypoints at intermediate depths. A real
             dive computer probably computes a new waypoint several times a minute, and so
             automatically handles transients like this. You could do the same in the spreadsheet,
             but it would use up the available waypoints pretty quickly.

             In fact, there is no reason that the spreadsheet could not have hundreds of waypoints,
             except that it would become very large and difficult to display, and sixteen points is
             more than enough for expositional purposes. A much more efficient way of handling
             hundreds or thousands of waypoints would be to only retain the result of the last set
             of calculations, as a real dive computer would do. This sort of dynamic programming
             could be implemented in the spreadsheet as well, using a macro. But that would
             defeat the purpose of this entire exercise, which is to display the inner workings of
             the decompression algorithm. Trimix would be handled similarly, and I have done it
             also, but I will not go into the details.

             For simplicity, all dive profiles are assumed to begin at sea level breathing air,
             although altitude diving would be easy to implement. In fact, you can do this yourself
             by setting the first waypoint to the desired altitude for a very long time ( 10,000
             minutes should do the trick. ) Then just make sure your last waypoint will allow you
             to ascend to the same altitude. Altitudes above sea level are expressed in feet of water
             here:




PDF created with pdfFactory Pro trial version www.pdffactory.com
                              +1000 feet of air = approximately -1 foot of water.

             Try setting up some dive profiles of your own, and compare them with dive tables
             and your own computer. Set up profiles and surface intervals in increments, and
             watch how the controlling compartment changes during on-gassing and off-gassing.
             The profiles you generate here will probably be less conservative than what you will
             get from a real dive table, but should be in the ballpark. And as I said -

                     DO NOT USE THESE RESULTS FOR REAL DIVE PLANNING !




                                     Abyss - a real decompression program

             Buehlmann's is the simplest decompression algorithm, based on Haldane's ideas. For
             copyright reasons, most dive software and computers claim to use a Modified
             Haldane model, which is in fact modified to be Buehlmann's. There are other
             decompression algorithms as well, such as VPM ( Variable Permeability Model ) and
             RGBM ( Reduced Gradient Bubble Model. ) These algorithms model decompression
             based on bubble formation, and are much more complex and computationally
             intensive than Buehlmann's. If you would like to try one of these, I suggest V-
             Planner, which is a free download.

             The interesting thing is that all these algorithms, regardless of exactly what they are
             modeling, generate surprisingly similar schedules, which in the end must all agree
             with the same empirical data. In fact, most algorithms, including the one shown, are
             actually tweaked to agree with the empirical data. Some people will dicker over
             minor variations, but the truth is that decompression calculations are imprecise by
             nature, and real-world decompression is subject to many other factors, many of which
             are simply unpredictable.




PDF created with pdfFactory Pro trial version www.pdffactory.com
             It is my own feeling that the apparent precision of each algorithm, and the small
             differences between them, are completely overwhelmed by random real-world
             factors. This renders the choice of algorithm inconsequential, and makes them all
             somewhat suspect. It is far too easy to look at the complexity of any calculation, and
             the number of decimal places that a modern computer will carry and display, and get
             the impression that the result is extremely accurate when in fact it is not.

             The term "undeserved hit" is used to describe cases where a diver did nothing wrong,
             whether it be by tables or their dive computer, and got bent anyway. Such things
             happen, and always will. In the end, decompression is still a statistical science, and
             no model is 100% correct. Given all the unknowns and uncertainties, the best way to
             be safe is to keep the modeling simple and the calculations error-free, and dive the
             resulting schedules conservatively, with voluntary deep stops and extended hang
             times, especially at the shallow end.

             I have also developed a version of this spreadsheet for Trimix, Heliox, and other
             mixes. That algorithm is computationally much more complex, requiring four
             interlinked sheets where the Nitrox/Air version used only one. Building this
             complexity into a dive computer is clearly no easy task - the majority of Trimix dive
             computers that have been released over the years have proven to be buggy if not
             outright flawed. I myself would not trust one.




PDF created with pdfFactory Pro trial version www.pdffactory.com
